doc: add a simpler explanation of dependencies (#213403)
NixOS/nixpkgs: doc/stdenv/stdenv.chapter.md

## Specifying dependencies {#ssec-stdenv-dependencies}

Build systems often require more dependencies than just what `stdenv` provides. This section describes attributes accepted by `stdenv.mkDerivation` that can be used to make these dependencies available to the build system.

> ### Simplified overview {#ssec-stdenv-dependencies-overview}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Overview {#ssec-stdenv-dependencies-overview}

```

An overview is simplified by definition.

> A full reference of the many kinds of dependencies needed to cover all possible cases is provided in the next section, but here is a simplified overview of the most common kinds. It should cover most derivations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A full reference of the different kinds of dependencies is provided in the next section, but here is an overview of the most common ones.
It should cover most use cases.
```

We don't have to make it sound overly complex, even if it is, and should use a neutral tone in the reference manual. We're just stating facts.

> Add dependencies to `nativeBuildInputs` if they are executed during the build:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add dependencies to `nativeBuildInputs` if they are needed during the build:
```

These may be just files, not necessarily executables.

Reviewer 2: The issue is that runtime libraries are also needed during the build (for linking).

Reviewer: So saying "needed" is less wrong, isn't it?

Reviewer 2: We do not want to add the runtime libraries to `nativeBuildInputs`, even though they are already “needed” for linking.

Reviewer: Okay, what's the right phrasing then? Dependencies executed during the build sounds weird, because dependencies are generic and may or may not even contain executables.

Reviewer 2: Maybe something like “if their code is executed” then? If the dependency does not contain code, it should not really matter where it is placed anyway.

Author: I think "executed" is correct, because all these distinctions are for cross: only executable files differ by architecture and matter for cross. An image can be in whatever it does not really matter.

- those which are needed on `$PATH` during the build, for example `cmake` and `pkg-config`
- [setup hooks](#ssec-setup-hooks), for example [`makeWrapper`](#fun-makeWrapper)
- interpreters needed by [`patchShebangs`](#patch-shebangs.sh) for build scripts (with the `--build` flag), which can be the case for e.g. `perl`

Add dependencies to `buildInputs` if they will end up copied or linked into the final output or otherwise used at runtime:
- libraries used by compilers, for example `zlib`,
- interpreters needed by [`patchShebangs`](#patch-shebangs.sh) for scripts which are installed, which can be the case for e.g. `perl`

> Note that these criteria are not incompatible: for example software using Wayland usually needs the `wayland` library at runtime (so `wayland` should be added to `buildInputs`) but also executes the `wayland-scanner` program as part of the build to generate code (so `wayland` should also be added to `nativeBuildInputs`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
::: {.note}
These criteria are independent.

For example, software using Wayland usually needs the `wayland` library at runtime, so `wayland` should be added to `buildInputs`.
But it also executes the `wayland-scanner` program as part of the build to generate code, so `wayland` should also be added to `nativeBuildInputs`.
:::
```

This is important information and should be highlighted and taken apart a bit to make it easier to parse.

Dependencies needed only to run tests are similarly classified between native (executed during build) and non-native (executed at runtime):

> - `nativeCheckInputs` for test tools needed on `$PATH` (like `ctest`) and [setup hooks](#ssec-setup-hooks) (for example [`pytestCheckHook`](#python))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `nativeCheckInputs` for test tools needed on `$PATH` (such as `ctest`) and [setup hooks](#ssec-setup-hooks) (for example [`pytestCheckHook`](#python))
```

Not English native, but AFAIK if something is like some other thing, the likeness should be made clear. If you mean to make a sample, use "such as".

- `checkInputs` for libraries linked into test executables (for example the `qcheck` OCaml package)

> These dependencies are only injected when `doCheck` is set to `true`.

Reviewer: Add a link to doCheck

> Consider for example this simplified derivation for `solo5`, a sandboxing tool:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Example

Consider this simplified derivation for `solo5`, a sandboxing tool:
```

Since the example is huge and the text before is quite long, it's worth having a subsection we can link to.

```nix
stdenv.mkDerivation rec {
  pname = "solo5";
  version = "0.7.5";

  src = fetchurl {
    url = "https://github.com/Solo5/solo5/releases/download/v${version}/solo5-v${version}.tar.gz";
    sha256 = "sha256-viwrS9lnaU8sTGuzK/+L/PlMM/xRRtgVuK5pixVeDEw=";
  };

  nativeBuildInputs = [ makeWrapper pkg-config ];
  buildInputs = [ libseccomp ];

  postInstall = ''
    substituteInPlace $out/bin/solo5-virtio-mkimage \
      --replace "/usr/lib/syslinux" "${syslinux}/share/syslinux" \
      --replace "/usr/share/syslinux" "${syslinux}/share/syslinux" \
      --replace "cp " "cp --no-preserve=mode "

    wrapProgram $out/bin/solo5-virtio-mkimage \
      --prefix PATH : ${lib.makeBinPath [ dosfstools mtools parted syslinux ]}
  '';

  doCheck = true;
  nativeCheckInputs = [ util-linux qemu ];
  checkPhase = '' [elided] '';
}
```

> `makeWrapper` is a setup hook, i.e. a shell script sourced by the generic builder of `stdenv`. It is thus executed during build and must be added to `nativeBuildInputs`. `pkg-config` is a build tool which the configure script of `solo5` expects to be on `$PATH` during build: therefore, it must be added to `nativeBuildInputs`. `libseccomp` is a library referenced by `$out/bin/solo5-elftool`. As it is used at runtime, it must be added to `buildInputs`. Tests need `qemu` and `getopt` (from `util-linux`) on `$PATH`, these must be added to `nativeCheckInputs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `makeWrapper` is a setup hook, i.e., a shell script sourced by the generic builder of `stdenv`.
  It is thus executed during the build and must be added to `nativeBuildInputs`.
- `pkg-config` is a build tool which the configure script of `solo5` expects to be on `$PATH` during the build:
  therefore, it must be added to `nativeBuildInputs`.
- `libseccomp` is a library referenced by `$out/bin/solo5-elftool`.
  As it is used at runtime, it must be added to `buildInputs`.
- Tests need `qemu` and `getopt` (from `util-linux`) on `$PATH`, these must be added to `nativeCheckInputs`.
```

Since you're listing things, and there is lots of information, it would be nice to give it appropriate visual structure.

In any case [we recommend breaking markdown lines at sentence boundaries](https://nix.dev/contributing/documentation#markdown), because it makes edits, reviews, and diffs much more convenient.

> Finally, notice that some dependencies are injected directly in the shell code of phases: `syslinux`, `dosfstools`, `mtools`, and `parted`. This is perfectly fine. Nix will detect that they are present in the output `$out` and will mark them as runtime dependencies even if they are not present in `buildInputs`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Some dependencies are injected directly in the shell code of phases: `syslinux`, `dosfstools`, `mtools`, and `parted`.
  Nix will detect that they are present in the output `$out` and will mark them as runtime dependencies even if they are not present in `buildInputs`.
```

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this cannot be read as that only `$out` is scanned. Or that stuff being put into phases will always end up as runtime dependencies. Probably not an issue with careful reading but I have seen this assumption enough times to want to be extra clear.

Maybe something like  “Some dependencies are injected […]. As  the `postInstall` hook will install a file containing references to those dependencies to the `$out` output, Nix will detect that and mark them as runtime dependencies even if they are not present in `buildInputs`.”

Reviewer: The Nix manual still doesn't have anything about reference scanning, but @Ericson2314 and me have work in the pipeline. It will take a while to land though, don't hold your breath.

I agree the way it reads now is prone to misconception. Maybe we can massage it to be not wrong but not go into detail too much, and later link to the Nix manual once that stuff is there.

Author: I tried something, tell me what you think

> For more complex cases, like libraries linked into an executable which is then executed as part of the build system, read on the next section.

Reviewer: Sections may be reordered, and implying an order in the prose is prone to dangling pointers. Please use an explicit link, IIRC there is a way to expand headings automatically. Since I don't know the manual by heart, honestly I'm not even sure what you refer to exactly, because the next section is titled Reference and that doesn't tell me how it will answer the question.

Reviewer 2: `read [](#ssec-stdenv-dependencies-reference)` should work.

## Specifying dependencies {#ssec-stdenv-dependencies}

Build systems often require more dependencies than just what `stdenv` provide. This section describes attributes that `stdenv.mkDerivation` accepts and which can be used to make these dependencies available to the build system.

> ### Simplified overview

Reviewer 2: Please add an anchor so that we have a stable reference we can link.

```suggestion
### Simplified overview {#ssec-stdenv-dependencies-overview}
```

A full reference of the many kinds of dependencies needed to cover all possible cases is provided in the next section, but here is a simplified overview of the most common kinds. It should cover usual cases.

Add to `nativeBuildInputs` dependencies which are executed during the build:
- those which are needed on `$PATH` during the build, for example `cmake` and `pkg-config`
- [setup hooks](#ssec-setup-hooks), for example [`makeWrapper`](#fun-makeWrapper)
- interpreters needed by [`patchShebangs`](#patch-shebangs.sh) for build scripts (with the `--build` flag), which can be the case for e.g. `perl`

Add to `buildInputs` dependencies which will end up copied or linked into the final output, and used at runtime:
- libraries used by compilers, for example `zlib`,
- interpreters needed by [`patchShebangs`](#patch-shebangs.sh) for scripts which are installed, which can be the case for e.g. `perl`

> - runtime dependencies added with [`makeWrapper`](#fun-makeWrapper)

Reviewer 2: This sounds to me like they should be added, even when it is not the case as you point out later.

Author: what does it change? direct string interpolation bypasses splicing, but I don't think merely adding those to buildInputs fixes that if you still use string interpolation?

Reviewer 2: Yeah, I do not think that it would splice the interpolated variables so I am wondering why would one add them to `buildInputs`. I mean the redundancy does not hurt anything but it feels pointless.

Author: ah I misunderstood you comment. I was thinking about the design pattern of adding stuff in inputs and the use make wrapper as follows: ` --prefix PYTHONPATH : $PYTHONPATH`

Author: removed this line

> Note that these criteria are not incompatible: if you build a python project that has a build script written in python, python will belong to both `buildInputs` and `nativeBuildInputs`.

Author: the mention of plugins confuses me more than otherwise.

> maybe python project isn't the best example here since we have an entire infra for just that. maybe?

that's true, do you have suggestions of a replacement that is well-known and yet does not have a big infra in nixpkgs? Maybe perl?

> Note that these criteria are not incompatible: if you build a python project that has a build script written in python, python will belong to both `buildInputs` and `nativeBuildInputs`.

Author: Another possiblity is gdk-pixbuf, which is both a lib and a setup hook. but this one is far from obvious though.

> Note that these criteria are not incompatible: if you build a python project that has a build script written in python, python will belong to both `buildInputs` and `nativeBuildInputs`.

Reviewer 3: wayland has to go in both often for wayland-scanner (a program used at build time) and libwayland (linked against; used at runtime).  We _sort of_ hide that by doing `wayland-scanner = wayland.bin` in all-packages.nix.

> Note that these criteria are not incompatible: if you build a python project that has a build script written in python, python will belong to both `buildInputs` and `nativeBuildInputs`.

Reviewer 2: `glib` is a very common example it contains both a library and code generation tools (e.g. `glib-mkenums`).

> Note that these criteria are not incompatible: if you build a python project that has a build script written in python, python will belong to both `buildInputs` and `nativeBuildInputs`.

Author: I went for the wayland example, thank you.

> Dependencies needed only to run tests are similarly classified between native (used during build) and non-native (used at runtime):

Reviewer 2: `s/used/executed/` as linking can be considered usage.

> Note that these criteria are not incompatible: for example software using wayland usually needs the wayland library at runtime (so `wayland` should be added to `buildInputs`) but also executes the `wayland-scanner` executable as part of the build to generate code (so `wayland` should also be added to `nativeBuildInputs`).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Note that these criteria are not incompatible: for example software using Wayland usually needs the `wayland` library at runtime (so `wayland` should be added to `buildInputs`) but also executes the `wayland-scanner` program as part of the build to generate code (so `wayland` should also be added to `nativeBuildInputs`).
```

  };

  nativeBuildInputs = [ makeWrapper pkg-config ];
  buildInputs = [ libseccomp ];

  postInstall = ''
    substituteInPlace $out/bin/solo5-virtio-mkimage \
      --replace "/usr/lib/syslinux" "${syslinux}/share/syslinux" \
      --replace "/usr/share/syslinux" "${syslinux}/share/syslinux" \
      --replace "cp " "cp --no-preserve=mode "

    wrapProgram $out/bin/solo5-virtio-mkimage \
      --prefix PATH : ${lib.makeBinPath [ dosfstools mtools parted syslinux ]}
  '';

  doCheck = true;
  nativeCheckInputs = [ util-linux qemu ];
  checkPhase = '' [elided] '';
}
```

`makeWrapper` is a setup hook, i.e. a shell script sourced by the generic builder of `stdenv`. It is thus executed during build and must be added to `nativeBuildInputs`. `pkg-config` is a build tool which the configure script of `solo5` expects to be on `$PATH` during build: therefore, it must be added to `nativeBuildInputs`. `libseccomp` is a library referenced by `$out/bin/solo5-elftool`. As it is used at runtime, it must be added to `buildInputs`. Tests need `qemu` and `getopt` (from `util-linux`) on `$PATH`, these must be added to `nativeCheckInputs`.

> Finally, notice that some dependencies are injected directly in the shell code of phases: `syslinux`, `dosfstools`, `mtools`, and `parted`. This is perfectly fine. `nix` will detect that they are present in the output `$out` and will mark them as runtime dependencies even if they are not present in `buildInputs`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, notice that some dependencies are injected directly in the shell code of phases: `syslinux`, `dosfstools`, `mtools`, and `parted`. This is perfectly fine. Nix will detect that they are present in the output `$out` and will mark them as runtime dependencies even if they are not present in `buildInputs`.
```

For more complex cases, like libraries linked into an executable which is then executed as part of the build system, read on the next section.

> ### Reference

Reviewer 2: This should have an anchor too.

      --replace "/usr/share/syslinux" "${syslinux}/share/syslinux" \
      --replace "cp " "cp --no-preserve=mode "

    wrapProgram $out/bin/solo5-virtio-mkimage \
      --prefix PATH : ${lib.makeBinPath [ dosfstools mtools parted syslinux ]}
  '';

  doCheck = true;
  nativeCheckInputs = [ util-linux qemu ];
  checkPhase = '' [elided] '';
}
```

- `makeWrapper` is a setup hook, i.e., a shell script sourced by the generic builder of `stdenv`.
  It is thus executed during the build and must be added to `nativeBuildInputs`.
- `pkg-config` is a build tool which the configure script of `solo5` expects to be on `$PATH` during the build:
  therefore, it must be added to `nativeBuildInputs`.
- `libseccomp` is a library linked into `$out/bin/solo5-elftool`.
  As it is used at runtime, it must be added to `buildInputs`.
- Tests need `qemu` and `getopt` (from `util-linux`) on `$PATH`, these must be added to `nativeCheckInputs`.
- Some dependencies are injected directly in the shell code of phases: `syslinux`, `dosfstools`, `mtools`, and `parted`.
In this specific case, they will end up in the output of the derivation (`$out` here).

> As Nix marks dependencies whose absolute path is present in the output as runtime dependencies, adding `syslinux` etc. to `buildInputs` is unnecessary.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As Nix marks dependencies whose absolute path is present in the output as runtime dependencies, adding them to `buildInputs` is not required.
```
